The following are roles to know:

Data Subject - an individual who is the subject of personal data


Data Owner - "Masters of all" ; responsible for classification of data and hold legal rights and complete control over the data they create


Data Controller - Determines the purpose(s) for which and the manner in which data is to be processed


Data Processor - "Managers of all" ; they process the data on behalf of the Data Controller and the following SPECIFICALLY:

	. Adherence to appropriate and relevant data policy and data ownership guidelines  

	. Ensuring accessibility to appropriate users, maintaining appropriate levels of dataset security  

	. Dataset maintenance & documentation  

	. Assurance of quality and validation of any additions to a dataset, including periodic audits to assure ongoing data integrity



Data Custodians - responsible for the safe custody, transport, storage of the data & implementation of business rules. A data custodian ensures:

	. Access to the data is authorized and controlled
	. Data stewards are identified for each data set
	. Technical processes sustain data integrity
	. Processes exist for data quality issue resolution in partnership with Data Stewards
	. Technical controls safeguard data
	. Data added to data sets are consistent with the common data model
	. Versions of Master Data are maintained along with the history of changes
	. Change management practices are applied in maintenance of the database/dataset
	. Data content & changes can be audited



Data Stewards - responsible for utilizing an organization's data governance processes to ensure fitness of data elements - both the content and metadata. 

Data stewards focus on processes, policies, guidelines & responsibilities for administering organizations' entire data in compliance with policy and/or regulatory obligations.





Topic 4: Ensure appropriate asset retention

Things to consider:

	1. Where data to be retained is
	2. What form(s) does the data exist in
	3. Who has access to the data
	4. How long does the data need to be retained under current conditions of access
	5. When will data access be modified / terminated
	6. Why is data being retained

